the empress woods at 10:00 would cien
was the first to last and the only woman
in china's long history to become an
emperor and ruled in her own name rather
than behind the scenes as some Empress
Dowager or some other hidden power
behind the throne she lived a very long
life considering the times living past
her 80th year she was a historical
person from the Tang Dynasty period
considered by many scholars to be
China's most golden of Ages
she lived from 625 to 705 ad the Tang
Dynasty was the period from 618 to 907
so her period came right at the start of
the tang dynasty like some of the other
characters from ancient Chinese history
would sit in was the stuff of these
Chinese Imperial soap operas beloved by
Asians around the world there's no
question that she lived and all the
names and dates from her reign are very
well documented but this was about 1300
years ago when she was living a good
1275 years before CNN so the sordid
details of her life that we'll look at
of course are rather mythical and open
to interpretation her life was one of
privileged upbringing becoming a
concubine in the imperial household at
13 or 14 and after bouncing back from
the brink of disaster she lives a long
life of the most horrific political and
palace intrigue until the Year 683 when
the Emperor died and at the age of 58 or
so she starts ruling from behind the
throne which was occupied by one of her
weaker sons who was easier to manipulate
many gruesome deaths later she becomes
Emperor ruling in her own name in 690 ad
and even establishing her own dynasty
which didn't survive her and her reign
as just as mysterious as a rise to power
depending on which historian you listen
to she was either a vile creature of the
worst sort or a great reformer who
reigned during a period of peace and
great prosperity and who advanced the
Equality of women and ushered in a
bureaucratic system based on merit
rather than the connections to the
imperial family there's no way to tell
and the earliest source documents
from Confucian sources centuries after
her death and everyone knows how
Confucius viewed women not very highly
so let's look at her long and
interesting life woods attend was
actually born woo job in whenshe County
about 50 miles southwest of tyre and the
present-day capital of Shaanxi province
she was the daughter of who Sherpa who
was an official close to the Tang
Dynasty founder
ghalsuu also known as Li Yin her
mother's family were something like the
Kennedys of their day the former rulers
of the Sui dynasty that she grew up in a
very aristocratic household and was
taught reading writing and music the
second emperor of the Tang Dynasty the
Sherman took whoo-chow
as his concubine the Sherman was the son
of the Tong dynasty founder and he took
the name of tight song she was 13 to 14
years old when she became the Emperor's
concubine she answered the harem ranked
of the fifth grade which was also called
its higher end the whole system of
calculations was very structured and the
Emperor could have as many as 120 or so
if he wanted the Tong concubine ranking
system had nine ranks so Jo didn't come
in at the bottom but she wasn't what you
call high ranking the top ranked
concubines were thief a rank or the
first rank these were divided into four
levels gray Fang Xu Fei Fei and Shyam
fate then you had the second rank the
bean rank who had nine different levels
and after that there was one concubine
per rank and Wu Chao was the jungle team
or fifth rank called that siren so when
she entered the Emperor titles harem she
was given the name will main yang she
entered as a teenager competing against
hardened veterans to the game of palace
intrigue she had to learn fast she had
some kind of relationship that she
apparently cultivated with one of the
emperor's younger sons named the jerk
the juror was declared crown prince in
643 if you watch the soap opera she had
some steamy relationship with leecher
and in this day
we'd probably call it an inappropriate
relationship after all technically we'll
jaw or remain young as she was called
now was the crown prince's stepmother
yes her rotten luck would have it the
second tongue Emperor her benefactor
died in 649 after supposedly drinking
some elixir of life that poisoned him
instead they had no children so as per
the custom of the time you main yang was
sent to a nunnery to live out the rest
of her days as a Buddhist nun so she
heads off to gaya temple resigned to her
fate
now again none of this is documented in
any shape or form that could be taken as
fact for almost every turn of her life
there are at least two diametrically
opposite points of view and nothing can
be accepted as true or even probably
true this whole period between the time
of tight zones death and the time when
fate intervened and the Chur who by now
was the third tong emperor gaozong is
anyone's guess so the story goes that
emperor gaozong who used to be called
league chirp visited the gaya temple and
there's this whole story about how they
saw each other and he was reunited with
her this time as Emperor and that as the
crown prince who knows whatever the case
after serving some time as a nun the
emperor gaozong arranges for Wu Mei
Niang to go back to the palace there was
no stopping her now she now had a
powerful benefactor who made her a jolly
the highest-ranked concubine at the
second level so this is the Year 650 651
around then and she's 24 25 years old
now the fun begins wu mei niang returns
to the palace and she has two main
rivals who are ready and waiting to do
battle with her one was the Emperor's
wife known as empress wang and the other
was the highest-ranking concubine known
as xiao shu fate
actually this would be she'll her family
name with Xu Fei being added on to her
name signifying her rank as a concubine
of the Emperor now this is where the
history gets kind of murky or murkier
the documents handed down over the past
thousand years of all kinds of
opposing stories about what happened I'm
sure you're not listening to this
podcast to get stuck in the quagmire of
the minutiae of Chinese history and all
the names and books and treaties and
county officials so let me just plot on
with what air quotes they say about the
next nine years whence she became the
power behind the throne and ten years
beyond that when she herself becomes the
Emperor in 690 so will main yang was a
hardened veteran 24 25 years of age
after spending a certain amount of time
her head shaved living in a Buddhist
convent called GaN yes as I said she had
these two rivals over there
one was Empress Wong and the number one
concubines Xiao Xu Fei while she had
them done in so to speak the number one
concubine Xiao Xu Fei
this was Galton's favorite and she
needed to eliminate her a bunch of
palace intrigue and skullduggery later
Xiao Xu Fei is out and Wu main yang is
in with a vengeance and then comes the
defining moment of the life of who we
would know later as wootsat Yin she had
a daughter with God's own this baby died
and the two versions of the story are
that who made yang aka woods a 10
strangled her own baby to frame and
press Wong or the other version is
empress wang killed the baby this was
about 654 be ad whatever the case may be
it happened and happened in a very
suspicious way that sort of implicated
the jealous and childless empress wang
in the murder of the Emperor and
Rumanians daughter even though the
Emperor loved his Empress he had to do
what he had to do
so now after 654 looming yang now has
two less dangerous rivals to deal with
and she's growing more powerful by the
day one thing to keep in mind remember
she came from aristocracy and was well
educated and spent her teens growing up
as a fifth grade concubine in the palace
so she picked up a lot of knowledge of
statecraft along the way Galton was no
dummy and greatly relied on her input in
matters of State she was participating
fully in the running of government
affairs and I forgot to mention she got
rid of empress wang and consort she'll
but still
an army of powerful and deceitful court
officials who couldn't stand her and
knew how deadly a foe she could be one
day and how boy 1,300 years or so later
Chairman Mao's third wife Jeong Ching
sure learned a thing or two from woods
at 10:00 about how to get back at all
those who defied you on the way up so
keep that in mind too
and these officials were mostly all
Confucian and in that philosophy the
woman's place was in the home and she
should keep her mouth shut
anyways to end the story about women
yawns - defeated rivals she had the
Emperor cut off their arms and legs and
drown them in a vat of wine or so the
story goes
so she gains even more power by bearing
two sons with God's own you Hadley home
born in 654 and lee hsien born a year or
so later there's some sidebar about lee
hsien not really being remain young son
but actually her sisters who was also
serving in the courts anyways always
something like that with woods OTN
always a juicy story behind every fact
and opinion about her life she formally
becomes Galan's Empress in 655 or 656
Galton was sort of forced to deal with
one of these Henry the eighth's
situations he wanted to promote women
young but too many of the officials at
the imperial court from the
highest-ranking XY's young to the lowest
guy on the totem pole all fought him on
this and lost and like anyone who tried
to defied chairman mao thirteen hundred
years later they didn't fare well in the
aftermath and the newly crowned empress
wu had a personal hand in most of these
falls from power and later destruction
no doubt let's skip to the big year 660
gods on who no doubt lived all the
excesses that being emperor of china
entitled you to at the tender age of 32
had a series of strokes that basically
leaves him incapacitated for the rest of
the 23 years he had left on this earth
in all this time who do you think ruled
in his name yeah you guessed it from a
screen behind the throne there she said
speaking for the propped-up emperor on
the throne who due to his infirmity
could not execute his responsibilities
later on it said after a while they
didn't even prop the emperor up on the
throne anymore
it just lay empty and the Empress gave
the orders from behind the screen and by
the way to put some good old-fashioned
Tong dynasty spin on the arrangement
they were officially joined together as
one and referred to as her Xiang or the
two sages this sort of justified Empress
Wu to speak on behalf of the
increasingly more and more disabled
Emperor so over the next 23 years until
emperor gaozong finally dies in 683 she
assembled her team and supposedly put
together this dream team of ministers
and whatnot who advised her well and
carried out all her reforms and ideas It
was as if after four decades of clawing
her way to the top she finally got there
and became a rather boring benign
Empress who later carried out all kinds
of reforms most notably to women
agriculture in the Imperial exam system
she lowered taxes overall it seems
everyone agrees she was a very competent
ruler once she reached the mountaintop
and all the bloodiest aspects of her
rise to power were all behind her she
wasn't the Stalin or Maputo says he say
go by any account so 683 she installs
the weaker of her two sons on the dragon
throne and rules through him as Empress
Dowager
she's now pushing 60 years old I won't
go into the details in the next seven
years
interesting though they are let's just
say it was the usual skullduggery with
her sons jockeying for position to take
over the throne
maybe a little too enthusiastically her
sons didn't fare well having wootz
attend as a mother she killed the eldest
one to post another son and another
lived under house arrest but later did
become Emperor she declares herself
emperor in 690 and calls herself Xiang
Xiang one thief or Xiang Xiang Emperor
it's also in 690 where she takes the
name officially as a ten and declared an
end to the Tong dynasty and established
the Jo dynasty or what we know is the
second Jo dynasty since they're already
was one that reigned from of 1045 to 256
BC she was the capital from Chang An to
Baal yeah
Hunan Province near the present-day
capital of jeongjo it's maybe a two-hour
car ride from there she ran for another
15 years and as she got old and feeble
she was overthrown in a palace coup old
hat for her she should have seen it
coming and she died in December 16
7:05 which made her about 80 years old
she had been in power pretty much from
the point she became Empress in 656 that
meant she ruled for 27 years and prior
to that didn't rule but was influential
at court and in getting her way so you
could say she was a power to be reckoned
with in the tang dynasty for about half
a century this was a period of vast
wealth and everyone lived off the fat of
the land
there was great territorial expansion in
the Tang court had embassies as far away
as Persia and Byzantium the Chinese
defeated the Korean kingdoms of koguryo
and Peck J and unified the country under
the kingdom of Shilla who were allies of
the tongue the Tibetans and Turks whose
Warriors were a stone in the boot during
woods with tens rein were soundly
defeated China was all-powerful and
living in a golden age for women and
farmers she supposedly did a lot
although I've read accounts that said
just the opposite she's credited with
allowing women to be financially
independent from their husbands and to
have their own wealth in their own name
women were educated in philosophy
politics and ethics they were permitted
to divorce they didn't have to bind
their feet anymore she advanced the
cause of Buddhism greatly and it
replaced Taoism as the state favorite
the Buddhist church was immensely
powerful and influential during the
period of roots of tens reign she had
farming manuals published and
disseminated information on farming
techniques and promoted labor saving
farm tools she reduced taxes and many
farmers were allowed to keep more grain
to sell
I also heard she broke the backs of the
peasants with her taxes so you never
know she chose ministers based on merits
rather than who their relative was or
what their connection was in the palace
Woodson tans own palace secretary was a
woman poet she changed the Imperial exam
system
6:16 is that it was open to all and not
just to the aristocracy this allowed the
government bureaucracy to shift from
being controlled by aristocrats to being
controlled by scholars she actually
interviewed Imperial exam candidates
personally she was a little bad a little
good or a lot bad or a lot good depends
on whose version of woods attend you're
studying one thing's for real she was
indeed a very colorful historic figure
who became more of a legend than someone
we could really get our hands around and
study she was buried near the gaozong
emperor in Chinle which is the site of
the Tong Imperial burying grounds her
tomb was located and discovered by
archaeologists but like that of the
first emperor
she sure Fong D it remains unexcavated
to this day her life was a real bonanza
for all these major Chinese television
and movie production houses one of the
best Imperial serial dramas I ever
watched was based on her life
so I hope you enjoyed that this is
Laszlo Montgomery once again wishing you
a pleasant and fond farewell from the
quaint little college town of Claremont
California home of the always popular
and quintessentially American Claremont
village join us next week at the China
history podcast for another exciting
episode